---
title: How to Advance Government Career
author: Mark G
date: '2021-03-13'
slug: government-career-e1-to-gs-14-my-path
categories:
  - Career
tags:
  - GS-14
  - government
  - enlisted
  - red tape
  - operations research analyst
  - operations research
  - 1670 series
  - 0346 series
  - 1515 series
  - 301 series
  - Regulatory Informatics Specialists
cover: /post/2021-03-13-government-career-e1-to-gs-14-my-path.en_files/cpath.jpg
summary: Learn one way to go from E-1 to GS-14. Everyone has a different career trejectory; however, if this path sounds like you're on it, read on to get inspired.
---

# How to Advance in the Government – from E-1 to GS-14 Fast

<p id="border_blue">The Government is finally jumping on the emerging technologies bandwagon. The public sector wants to catch up to where the industry is and fast. Want to learn how I advanced my career into this lucrative field? Read on...</p>


![Man looking up at building - successful looking.](/post/2021-03-13-government-career-e1-to-gs-14-my-path.en_files/cpath.jpg)


In today’s Government, there is a push for hiring a tech talented workforce. The
government sector prides itself on engaging and empowering diverse people to
deliver better services. But, one thing is for sure: innovating starts with
streamlining the procurement process to ensure quicker adoption of new tech in
the industry. This article will briefly describe how I went from soldering parts
on a circuit board and Airman, E-1, to managing millions of dollars of programs
as a GS-14 over a quick couple of decades.

I got my start back in 2002, 20 years ago. Time flies! I started as an Airman in
the United States Air Force, making about [\$1,200 per month (See E-2
pay)](https://www.navycs.com/charts/2002-military-pay-chart.html). I was very
ignorant of how the parts on the plane were procured, manufactured, shipped, or
tracked. So I did not jump into the acquisition side right away.

I am not going to give a detailed history of my entire career. Instead, I want
to set the stage so others that are in my past positions can see a path forward.
I talk about my background and how I advanced within the Government in these two
long videos [here](https://youtu.be/ie2GsudUs38), and part 2 is
[here](https://youtu.be/psiBi98xHa0).

![Road through mountains depicting a journey. ](/post/2021-03-13-government-career-e1-to-gs-14-my-path.en_files/matt-howard-A4iL43vunlY-unsplash.jpg)

My journey started when I had an opportunity to join a program that allowed Wage
Grade (WG) workers to convert to the General Schedule (GS). In layman’s terms,
this means going from a blue-collar worker to a white-collar worker. The program
brought me from a WG-12 (\~\$21/hour at the time) to a GS-5. I was able to
retain my pay for two years with this program. The GS-5 lasted six months, and
then I became a GS-7. GS-7 for one year then became a GS-9. I was a GS-9 for one
year until I got to the program’s max level of GS-11. What was this job I sought
after? The term is Equipment Specialist or ES. Look for similar programs like
this. They all change over time, so be on the lookout. There were programs
called PATHWAYS for recent grads too.

These programs usually require a lengthy application process. Don’t let that
deter you. I repeat, don’t let the application process detur you. The fact that
it’s lengthy is to your advantage. That means more than half the people who
wanted to apply for that program didn’t. It’s too long for them to bother. You
will, of course, usually need supervisory support for these programs. Make it
easy for them to sponsor you. Do their work for you and simply have them endorse
it.

As an Amazon Associate, I earn from qualifying purchases at no extra cost to the
consumer. In addition, I earn commissions for purchases made through links in
this post.

## The role of the Equipment Specialist (1670)

I created a short six-minute video on what I do as an [Equipment
Specialist](https://youtu.be/z7bCiDDRE38). The series, in government terms, is a
1670 series. I’ll link to the video below, as well.

In short, I had to be knowledgeable about all aspects of the equipment I was
assigned. In my case, it was jet engines. Now, I have never worked on a jet
engine before. I am terrible at anything mechanical. Lucky for me, my job was
more on the analytics side of things. You see, the position of an ES on
something as complicated as a jet engine requires more than just one ES. The
organization I was in had a team split up into two sections. One group focused
on forecasting and inventories, while the other group specialized in technical
aspects of the engines. Lucky for me, I was not on the technical side.

You must have a good idea of what the equipment does and how it works, though.
For example, how am I supposed to predict how many parts will break on the
engine? When to bring machines in for periodic maintenance? How to phase a new
*part* in due to a safety concern? The list goes on. It’s not easy. We try to
use sophisticated systems like D200A and D200F and other meaningless named
systems. These systems work well for easily predictable outcomes. The main idea
is that the systems will use the past knowledge and history of the engine to
predict future needs. Let me give a quick example.

What would you do if you own a fleet of cars and want to know how many and when
to buy new tires for the vehicles? One method is to look at past data. In
theory, if you needed new tires every 30,000 miles on the cars and have *XX*
number of vehicles, you can predict how many tires you will need. But, of
course, each car has a variable number of miles on it. However, if you have
enough vehicles, the law of averages might just help you out. What if miles are
seasonal? What if you purchased new vehicles? What if you wanted to phase out
old cars. Do you see how this could become complicated quickly? Well, it was my
job to help answer those questions, only with jet engines.

After a few years working with predictive analytics to try and keep airplanes in
the air, I got a promotion to a GS-12 Logistics Management Specialist, or
346-series.

## The role of the Logistics Management Specialist (0346)

This article is not about the specific roles, so I will give the condensed
version of what a Logistics Management Specialist, or loggie, does. A loggie
must have a holistic view of all the parts worldwide, as well as the mission.
Therefore, a loggie has broader control of the entire program. For example, if
two bases, A and B, both requested a part to repair an engine, typically, the
base that ordered it first receives it first. That is where the loggie comes in.
The loggie would understand the scarcity of this part and know that base A, even
with the part, could not make the engine fly because it is also missing other
parts. So, even though base *B* ordered the part last, in this hypothetical
example, the loggie would override the system sending the part to the base that
could fix the engine whole and strap it on a plane for flight.

Of course, there are many, many more details missing, but that is the idea. Not
to mention you must work with multiple agencies and scramble to find parts, work
with engineering to extend the life of components, haggle with other departments
for priority over piece parts. The list goes on.

## Operations Research Specialist (ORA/ORSA-MAC/GS-1515 Series)

I transitioned from a Logistics Management Specialists, 356-series, to an
Operations Research Analyst, 1515-series (NH-1515-03). The move was technically
a promotion because I was now in the NH pay band, equivalent to a GS-12/13
combined. This change was a crucial factor for my next promotion. This job
entailed looking at, curating, finding insights into all data within the
organization. The organization I am referring to is the USAF, of course. This
position was eye-opening. Having access to that much data was unbelievably
valuable. You can see trends and develop insights you have never thought of
through intuition. Of course, wrangling the data and breaking down the silos of
data warehouses was challenging. This position allowed me to advance my data
analysis skills as well as learn more about IT systems. I can go on and on about
this career field, but I will dedicate a post to the 1515 series later.

I was fortunate enough to be sent to an army school at Fort Lee to learn more
about Operations Research. This 3+ months of school helped solidify my career in
technology and propel me to my next role.

## Operations Researcher / Regulatory Informatics Specialist

I find it interesting that most scientists and engineers go deep into the rabbit
hole of whatever they are interested in – perhaps too much. It was a time for a
change. I have been working in the same industry for over 16 years. I decided to
take a promotion and move across the country. Although I kept the same title for
a while, I hardly did any Operations Research. This was when I jumped into the
realm of acquisitions and the software development life cycle.

The acquisition is a lengthy process that takes a lot of time and resources to
get right. I am not going to get into specifics now. However, a particular skill
you must possess is being a bureaucracy slayer. In other words, how to navigate
the red tape of the government bureaucracy.

Solving complex issues and figuring out a way to get to the organization’s
desired result using the tools available, in the time allotted, and under the
budget constraints are all important factors to consider. Knowing the policies,
rules, regulations, or simply helping people work through them will
significantly help you succeed. Moving those obstacles out of the way will help
you become a leader in the organization.

At many organizations and agencies, the issues can be local policies put into
place years ago or myths that people have passed from one generation of
acquisition professionals to another that we have to work through.
